So after understanding the limitations of my network situation I figured that I needed something reliable, maybe even specialized in storage and virtualization, but primarily storage. I had a few old external USB drives around of different sizes and I did have a licence of Unraid in one of their sales before they increased the price of a licence and made some levels subscription based.

The popular alternative is TrueNAS, but the storage system in that OS wasn't flexible enough that I could mix storage sizes. Of course ZFS comes with good functionality like self healing, deduplication, but that file system needs to have all drives spinning to access any files. The speed is nice, but well the power and noise from these old cheap drives would drive me insane while the whole server would be sitting on my desk.

Unraid seemed like an energy efficient, quieter, more flexible variant that I could live with. The GUI is also simple, less stuff to learn while troubleshooting, less things to go wrong. Unraid doesn't recommend my setup of external USB drives. I did try to connect several hard drives with an external hard drive reader from AliExpress which had 4 total SATA ports, but well I quickly found out that it was a bit tricky finding the correct customs code for a SATA hard drive USB reader.

One major thing with Unraid that I dislike is that there is not self healing or any way to protect data from corruption (bitrot), besides just getting an offsite copy of the data that got corrupted. It checks if the parity is valid and if the files seem correct, but that doesn't seem too helpful in recovering data. I wanted to start using SnapRAID in conjunction with Unraid parity, but I didn't want to start experimenting with valuable data when I didn't have extra copies of this data. For now I just set up checksum calculation for the valuable files and keep older and frequent copies offsite.

USB in it's universality doesn't bode well with SMART data and as a result gets crazy with spinning up and down commands. I have a Seagate drive that has several modes for going low power, spinning down. Unraid doesn't like the specific modes, so I had to make a script that would disable these modes, but the command presumably gets written to the USB and not to the drive controller. Sometimes Unraid had trouble finding two similar USB external hard drives, so I had to juggle around USB ports until both of the drives were found.

In the end it did work good enough, but I was at a limit at a hardware level of how I could expand this setup. I could add a JBOD, but the experience with USB connected storage didn't give me any confidence that a costly piece of USB connected hardware will give me good results. I started moving my operations elsewhere... this time under the table, where I had extra space.